TEP-0111 - Propagating workspaces in taskruns (#5081)
tektoncd/pipeline: docs/pipelineruns.md

[`Custom tasks`](pipelines.md#using-custom-tasks) may or may not use workspaces.
Consult the documentation of the custom task that you are using to determine whether it supports workspaces.

#### Propagated Workspaces

**([alpha only](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/install.md#alpha-features))**

When using an embedded spec, workspaces from the parent `PipelineRun` will be
propagated to any inlined specs without needing to be explicitly defined. This
allows authors to simplify specs by automatically propagating top-level
workspaces down to other inlined resources.

> **Workspace substutions will only be made for `commands`, `args` and `script` fields of the `steps`.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Workspace substutions will only be made for `commands`, `args` and `script` fields of `steps`, `stepTemplates`, and `sidecars`.**
```

Author: Thanks!

```yaml
# Inline specifications of a PipelineRun
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
kind: PipelineRun
metadata:
  generateName: recipe-time-
spec:
  workspaces:
    - name: shared-data
      volumeClaimTemplate:
        spec:
          accessModes:
            - ReadWriteOnce
          resources:
            requests:
              storage: 16Mi
          volumeMode: Filesystem
  pipelineSpec:
    #workspaces:
    #  - name: shared-data
    tasks:
    - name: fetch-secure-data
      # workspaces:
      #   - name: shared-data 
      taskSpec:
        # workspaces:
        #   - name: shared-data 
        steps:
        - name: fetch-and-write-secure
          image: ubuntu
          script: |

> 	    echo hi >> $(workspaces.shared-data.path)/recipe.txt

Author: Thanks! I will fix this.

# Successful execution of the above PipelineRun
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
kind: PipelineRun
metadata:
  generateName: recipe-time-
  ...
spec:
  pipelineSpec:
  ...
status:
  completionTime: "2022-06-02T18:17:02Z"
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2022-06-02T18:17:02Z"
    message: 'Tasks Completed: 2 (Failed: 0, Canceled 0), Skipped: 0'
    reason: Succeeded
    status: "True"
    type: Succeeded
  pipelineSpec:
    ...
  taskRuns:
    recipe-time-lslt9-fetch-secure-data:
      pipelineTaskName: fetch-secure-data
      status:
        ...
        taskSpec:
          steps:
          - image: ubuntu
            name: fetch-and-write-secure
            resources: {}
            script: |
              echo hi >> cat /workspace/shared-data/recipe.txt
          workspaces:
          - name: shared-data
    recipe-time-lslt9-print-the-recipe:
      pipelineTaskName: print-the-recipe
      status:
        ...
        taskSpec:
          steps:
          - image: ubuntu
            name: print-secrets
            resources: {}
            script: cat /workspace/shared-data/recipe.txt
          workspaces:
          - name: shared-data
```

##### Workspace Referenced Resources

> The propagation of `Workspaces` will not work for `referenced specifications` because the behavior would become opaque when users can't see the relationship between `Workspaces` declared in the referenced resources and the `Workspaces` supplied in runtime resources. Attempting to propagate `Workspaces` to referenced resources will cause failures.

Author: Thanks

```yaml
# PipelineRun attempting to propagate Workspaces to referenced Tasks
apiVersion: v1

> kind: PersistentVolumeClaim

Author: will do!

metadata:
  name: shared-task-storage
spec:
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 16Mi
  volumeMode: Filesystem
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
---
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: fetch-secure-data
spec:
  steps:
  - name: fetch-and-write
    image: ubuntu
    script: |
      echo hi >> $(workspaces.shared-data.path)/recipe.txt
---
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: print-data
spec:
  params:
  - name: filename
  steps:
  - name: print-secrets
    image: ubuntu
    script: cat $(workspaces.shared-data.path)/recipe.txt
---
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
kind: Pipeline
metadata:
  name: fetch-and-print-recipe
spec:
  tasks:
  - name: fetch-the-recipe
    taskRef:
      name: fetch-secure-data
  - name: print-the-recipe
    taskRef:
      name: print-data
    runAfter:
      - fetch-the-recipe
---
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
kind: PipelineRun
metadata:
  generateName: recipe-time-
spec:
  pipelineRef:
    name: fetch-and-print-recipe
  workspaces:
  - name: shared-data
    persistentVolumeClaim:

>       claimName: shared-task-storage

Author: Agreed. I will fix that.

    persistentVolumeClaim:
      claimName: shared-task-storage
status:
  completionTime: "2022-06-02T19:02:58Z"
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2022-06-02T19:02:58Z"
    message: 'Tasks Completed: 1 (Failed: 1, Canceled 0), Skipped: 1'
    reason: Failed
    status: "False"
    type: Succeeded
  pipelineSpec:
    ...
  taskRuns:
    recipe-time-v5scg-fetch-the-recipe:
      pipelineTaskName: fetch-the-recipe
      status:
        completionTime: "2022-06-02T19:02:58Z"
        conditions:
        - lastTransitionTime: "2022-06-02T19:02:58Z"
          message: |
            "step-fetch-and-write" exited with code 1 (image: "docker.io/library/ubuntu@sha256:26c68657ccce2cb0a31b330cb0be2b5e108d467f641c62e13ab40cbec258c68d"); for logs run: kubectl -n default logs recipe-time-v5scg-fetch-the-recipe-pod -c step-fetch-and-write
          reason: Failed
          status: "False"
          type: Succeeded
        ...
        taskSpec:
          steps:
          - image: ubuntu
            name: fetch-and-write
            resources: {}
            script: | # See below: Replacements do not happen.
      	      echo hi >> $(workspaces.shared-data.path)/recipe.txt
```

> ##### Embedded Specifications with Referenced Resources
> 
> In the case of embedded specifications that have references, the `Workspaces` will be propagated up to the embedded specification level only. Users need to explicitly declare `Workspaces` wherever they reference resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Referenced TaskRuns within Embedded PipelineRuns

As mentioned in the [previous section](link), workspaces can only be propagated from PipelineRuns to embedded Pipeline specs, not Pipeline references. Similarly, workspaces can only be propagated from a Pipeline to embedded Task specs, not referenced Tasks. For example:
```

Author: Thanks!

```yaml
# PipelineRun attempting to propagate Workspaces to referenced Tasks
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: fetch-secure-data
spec:
  workspaces: # If Referenced, Workspaces need to be explicitly declared
  - name: recipe-store
  - name: shared-data
  - name: password-vault
  steps:
  - name: fetch-and-write
    image: ubuntu
    script: |
      if [ "hunter2" = "$(cat $(workspaces.password-vault.path)/password)" ]; then
        cp $(workspaces.recipe-store.path)/recipe.txt $(workspaces.shared-data.path)
      else
        echo "wrong password!"
        exit 1
      fi
---
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
kind: PipelineRun
metadata:
  generateName: recipe-time-
spec:
  workspaces:
  - name: password-vault
    secret:
      secretName: secret-password
  - name: recipe-store
    configMap:
      name: sensitive-recipe-storage
      items:
      - key: brownies
        path: recipe.txt
  - name: shared-data
    persistentVolumeClaim:
      claimName: shared-task-storage

>   pipelineSpec:

Reviewer: Can this example be simplified at all? Maybe just one task in the Pipeline, which is referenced, and only one workspace.

Author: Yes. I can do that.

[`Custom tasks`](pipelines.md#using-custom-tasks) may or may not use workspaces.
Consult the documentation of the custom task that you are using to determine whether it supports workspaces.

#### Propagated Workspaces

> **([alpha only](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/install.md#alpha-features))**

Reviewer 2: could we also list this feature in https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/install.md#alpha-features?

Author: sure

        #   - name: shared-data 
        steps:
        - name: fetch-and-write-secure
          image: ubuntu
          script: |
            if [ "hunter2" = "$(cat $(workspaces.password-vault.path)/password)" ]; then
              cp $(workspaces.recipe-store.path)/recipe.txt $(workspaces.shared-data.path)
              echo "success!!!"
            else
              echo "wrong password!"
              exit 1
            fi
    - name: print-the-recipe
      # workspaces:
      #   - name: shared-data 
      runAfter:
        - fetch-secure-data
      taskSpec:
        # workspaces:
        #   - name: shared-data 
        steps:
        - name: print-secrets
          image: ubuntu
          script: cat $(workspaces.shared-data.path)/$(params.filename)
```

On executing the pipeline run, the workspaces will be interpolated during resolution.
The specifications are not mutated before storage and so it remains the same.
The status is updated.

```yaml
# Successful execution of the above PipelineRun
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
kind: PipelineRun
metadata:
  generateName: recipe-time-
  ...
spec:
  params:
  - name: filename
    value: recipe.txt

>   pipelineSpec:

Author: done!

            resources: {}
            script: |
              if [ "hunter2" = "$(cat /workspace/password-vault/password)" ]; then
                cp /workspace/recipe-store/recipe.txt /workspace/shared-data
                echo "success!!!"
              else
                echo "wrong password!"
                exit 1
              fi
          workspaces:
          - name: password-vault
          - name: recipe-store
          - name: shared-data
    recipe-time-lslt9-print-the-recipe:
      pipelineTaskName: print-the-recipe
      status:
        ...
        taskSpec:
          steps:
          - image: ubuntu
            name: print-secrets
            resources: {}
            script: cat /workspace/shared-data/recipe.txt
          workspaces:
          - name: shared-data
```

##### Workspace Referenced Resources

The propagation of `Workspaces` will not work for `referenced specifications` because the behavior would become opaque when users can't see the relationship between `Workspaces` declared in the referenced resources and the `Workspaces` supplied in runtime resources. Attempting to propagate `Workspaces` to referenced resources will cause failures.

> ```yaml

Author: done.
